RESUME TIPS
RESUME LANGUAGE SHOULD BE:
Specific rather than general
Active rather than passive
Written to express not impress
Articulate rather than “flowery”
Fact-based (quantify and qualify)
Written for people who / systems that scan quickly
TOP FIVE RESUME MISTAKES:
Spelling and grammar errors
Missing email and phone information
Using passive language instead of “action” words
Not well organized, concise, or easy to skim
Not demonstrating results
DON’T:
Use personal pronouns (such as I or We)
Abbreviate
Use a narrative style
Use slang or colloquialisms
Include a picture
Include age or gender
List references
Start each line with a date
DO:
Be consistent in format and content
Make it easy to read and follow, balancing white space
Use consistent spacing, underlining, italics, bold, and capitalization for emphasis
List headings (such as Experience) in order of importance
Within headings, list information in reverse chronological order (most recent first)
Avoid information gaps such as a missing summer
Be sure that your formatting will translate properly if converted to a .pdf

ACTION VERBS FOR YOUR RESUME
LEADERSHIP							
Accomplished	Achieved	Administered	Analyzed	Assigned	Attained	Chaired	Consolidated
Contracted	Coordinated	Delegated	Developed	Directed	Earned	Evaluated	Executed
Handled	Headed	Impacted	Improved	Increased	Led	Mastered	Orchestrated
Organized	Oversaw	Planned	Predicted	Prioritized	Produced	Proved	Recommended
Regulated	Reorganized	Reviewed	Scheduled	Spearheaded	Strengthened	Supervised	Surpassed
COMMUNICATION							
Addressed	Arbitrated	Arranged	Authored	Collaborated	Convinced	Corresponded	Delivered
Developed	Directed	Documented	Drafted	Edited	Energized	Enlisted	Formulated
Influenced	Interpreted	Lectured	Liaised	Mediated	Moderated	Negotiated	Persuaded
Presented	Promoted	Publicized	Reconciled	Recruited	Reported	Rewrote	Spoke
Suggested	Synthesized	Translated	Verbalized	Wrote			
RESEARCH							
Clarified	Collected	Concluded	Conducted	Constructed	Critiqued	Derived	Determined
Diagnosed	Discovered	Evaluated	Examined	Extracted	Formed	Identified	Inspected
Interpreted	Interviewed	Investigated	Modeled	Organized	Resolved	Reviewed	Summarized
Surveyed	Systematized	Tested					
TECHNICAL							
Assembled	Built	Calculated	Computed	Designed	Devised	Engineered	Fabricated
Installed	Maintained	Operated	Optimized	Overhauled	Programmed	Remodeled	Repaired
Solved	Standardized	Streamlined	Upgraded				
TEACHING							
Adapted	Advised	Clarified	Coached	Communicated	Coordinated	Demystified	Developed
Enabled	Encouraged	Evaluated	Explained	Facilitated	Guided	Informed	Instructed
Persuaded	Set Goals	Stimulated	Studied	Taught	Trained		
QUANTITATIVE							
Administered	Allocated	Analyzed	Appraised	Audited	Balanced	Budgeted	Calculated
Computed	Developed	Forecasted	Managed	Marketed	Maximized	Minimized	Planned
Projected	Researched						
CREATIVE							
Acted	Composed	Conceived	Conceptualized	Created	Customized	Designed	Developed
Directed	Established	Fashioned	Founded	Illustrated	Initiated	Instituted	Integrated
Introduced	Invented	Originated	Performed	Planned	Published	Redesigned	Revised
Revitalized	Shaped	Visualized					
HELPING							
Assessed	Assisted	Clarified	Coached	Counseled	Demonstrated	Diagnosed	Educated
Enhanced	Expedited	Facilitated	Familiarized	Guided	Motivated	Participated	Proposed
Provided	Referred	Rehabilitated	Represented	Served	Supported		
ORGANIZATIONAL							
Approved	Accelerated	Added	Arranged	Broadened	Cataloged	Centralized	Changed
Classified	Collected	Compiled	Completed	Controlled	Defined	Dispatched	Executed
Expanded	Gained	Gathered	Generated	Implemented	Inspected	Launched	Monitored
Operated	Organized	Prepared	Processed	Purchased	Recorded	Reduced	Reinforced
Retrieved	Screened	Selected	Simplified	Sold	Specified	Steered	Structured
Systematized	Tabulated	Unified	Updated	Utilized	Validated	Verified	




Describe Your Work History
Work history is one of the most important parts of creating a perfect resume. Employers want to know you can deliver results, and here is where you show them your track record.

Start by listing your most recent employer first and move backward. Work experience over 15 years old may not be relevant anymore, so as you get further into the past, carefully weigh the benefits of adding each job. Don't be afraid to cut an irrelevant job or add a second page to the resume if you need more space.

The most valuable parts of your job history are the quantifiable achievements. Hiring managers prefer metrics over lists of job duties because they show the results of your work, suggesting you can do the same for them. Focusing on specific outcomes makes your achievements feel concrete.

Writing your work history as a list of measurable accomplishments will help you stand out from the competition. Additionally, write your accomplishments using action verbs to make your statements more impactful. Here's an example:

Raised employee retention rates by 15% over a three-year period by implementing a company culture initiative and organizing quarterly team events.
When an employer reads "retention rates," they see value in their bottom line.

Quantifiable achievements can come from various activities, such as increasing customer satisfaction or saving a company money. Accomplishments can be hard to quantify in retrospect, especially if you don't have access to a previous employer's analytics tools, so keep careful track of them while you're working.

Most success can be measured in terms of time, dollar amounts, volume, and percentages by giving it some thought. But even without numbers, you can still make a strong outcome-focused experience section if you use examples of specific achievements and describe how you've overcome challenges.

Highlight your achievements
If you're wondering how to make a resume that highlights your achievements, start by asking yourself a handful of questions.

Four questions to help you make a results-oriented resume:

Did I create a new program, process, or initiative that saved time, enhanced productivity, or increased revenue?
Did I meet or exceed the company's goals? How? By how much?
Did I lead a team on a special project? How many people were on the team? What was the project, and what did we accomplish?
Did I receive a promotion in record time?
Your list of answers will help you create much stronger bullet points.

Here are four examples of well-written, quantifiable successes:

Organized monthly volunteer projects with more than 30 volunteers per event.
Provided award-winning in-home medical care for 10 senior citizens over the span of three years.
Implemented a filing system that organized more than 500 past and current employee files, increasing efficiency by 100%.
Exceeded sales goals by an average of 30% every quarter in 2025.
See how much stronger work experience sounds when you have data to back it up?

Next up, the abilities that make you uniquely talented: your skills.

STEP 6

Emphasize Your  Relevant Skills
Skills are the lifeblood of your career; Without them, making a resume would be impossible.

The key to writing a resume that employers love is to showcase the breadth and depth of your skill set. By including a variety of soft and hard skills, the employer will recognize your versatility.

Soft skills are personal attributes, innate abilities, and personality traits that we are born with and develop throughout our lives.
Hard skills are practical abilities learned in school, on the job, or through training. These are the niche technical abilities that allow you to perform the specific responsibilities of the role.
Here's a side-by-side comparison to help you understand the difference:

Hard Skills
vs
Soft Skills
Programming
Foreign language
Machine learning
Bookkeeping
Video editing
Research
Data analysis
Project management
Financial forecasting
Technical writing
Relationship-building
Leadership
Active listening
Problem-solving
Adaptability
Perseverance
Collaboration
Creativity
Emotional intelligence
Flexibility
Additionally, you should name-drop specific software or technical skills you use in your day-to-day job, whether it be Photoshop for graphic design or a working understanding of OSHA safety procedures.

When matching your skills to the position, comb through the job requirements. Employers often list "Required Skills," "Essential Duties," or "Skills and Competencies," which often mix together all types of skills.

Employers also weave soft skills throughout job descriptions, like so:

If you're analytical, organized, and a strategic thinker with an eye for the big picture and deep customer empathy, then this might be the job for you.

It's perfectly acceptable to use a skill twice in your resume, such as in your job history and skills section, but you need appropriate context. You should only repeat the most important keywords, and you shouldn't repeat them enough to become repetitive.

For example, look at this job requirement:

Organize materials and supplies for all facilities departments, including janitorial, landscaping, and maintenance.

In your work history section, you could add an achievement like:

Created a system for organizing supplies for a 300-room, multibuilding hospital, reducing waste by 65% and increasing staff output by 20% over a six-month timeframe.

Simultaneously, you can mention "organization" in your skills section.

Another example is if the job description for a server position says they expect their employees to build rapport with guests.

In that case, one way to show you can do this might be to list interpersonal skills in your resume skills section. Then, in the job history section of your resume, point out a time you were recognized for building relationships with clients, which resulted in increased sales and customer retention.

Finally, let's talk about transferable skills.

Transferable skills
Transferable skills are important because you can take them anywhere. Changing careers? Trying to climb the corporate ladder? Coming back to the workforce after a break? In each situation, transferable skills are your friend.

Transferable skills are abilities and qualities that are valuable across various jobs and industries.

Consider the following guides to better understand some of the most popular transferable skills that can be useful for any professional.

Communication 
Clearly expressing ideas through speaking, writing, and listening supports collaboration and understanding in any setting, making communication a key skill to consider on your resume.

Teamwork
Working well with others to reach shared goals shows that you can contribute to group success and thrive in collaborative environments, which makes teamwork a strong addition to your resume.

Problem-solving 
Problem-solving skills carry over into many types of roles because many professions require the ability to find practical solutions to everyday challenges by thinking clearly and taking initiative.

Time management 
Managing your time effectively and prioritizing tasks helps you stay productive and organized, making time management a valuable skill to showcase.

Leadership
Regardless of your role, many employers will value your leadership abilities because taking the lead on tasks or guiding others shows you can motivate, support, and make decisions. 

Adaptability 
Adjusting to new situations and learning quickly signals that you're flexible and able to handle change, making adaptability extremely useful in the dynamic modern economy. 

Critical thinking
Critical thinking means analyzing information and making thoughtful decisions. Demonstrating your ability to think through difficult situations will help show employers that you can be relied upon.

Organization
Keeping tasks, deadlines, and information in order helps you stay on top of responsibilities, which makes organization a practical skill in any profession.

Project management 
A useful skill across industries, highlighting project management shows that you can coordinate work from start to finish to keep things on track.

Creativity
Thinking of new ideas or approaches shows that you can bring fresh solutions and perspectives, which makes creativity a versatile and impactful skill to highlight.

Pro tip
Any job seeker would benefit from focusing on 21st-century skills. These skills are crucial in today's job market and include digital literacy, critical thinking, creativity, and adaptability.

STEP 7

List Your Education or Training
Listing your degrees remains one of the most important steps in the quest to make a good resume. However, you don't want to overload your education section with too much information; There are facts you should include and others you shouldn't.

Your education section should include:

The name and location of schools you've attended
Any degree(s) and academic honors or awards you've earned
Relevant coursework or special projects (if you don't have much experience)
Your education section should not include:

Your GPA (unless it's at least 3.5 and you recently graduated)
The years you attended
Your graduation dates, which could introduce bias into the hiring process
Pro tip
If you are a student, recent graduate, or making a resume for your first job, it's okay to put your educational details at the top of your resume, under your objective or summary and work history. Otherwise, place it at the bottom of your resume.

However, sometimes education isn't a straight line. For example, millions of people who started college never finished it.

In that case, only include your unfinished degree if your area of study is relevant to the job; otherwise, don't include it. 

How to list an unfinished college degree on a resume:

Mention the name and location of the university.
List your GPA (if it's above 3.5).
Note the subject of your coursework.
Cite the number of credits you completed.
Showcase any awards accrued.
In cases where you're still attending school, you should also include an expected date of completion: [Month] + [Year].

What about certificates? You can treat a certificate of completion on your resume the same way you treat a degree, but if you have many certificates, you may want to create a designated section for them.

How to list a certificate of completion on a resume:

Create a heading on your resume or CV called "Certificates."
List the name of the certificate and the year completed.
Cite the organization that gave you the certificate.
Write as many entries as needed.
Here's a visual example of a strong education section:

Education Section
Pro tip
Licenses and certifications can boost your resume if you don't have much on-the-job experience because they verify your technical skills.

STEP 8

Add Optional Sections
Resumes shouldn't be generic. Every candidate has unique abilities to offer, which may require adding a new section.

Perhaps you took continuing education classes or went overseas to volunteer. Maybe you joined a professional organization or a parent-student council. These are all details that belong on your resume—but where to put them?

Create new sections for any outside-the-box experiences. The key is that they must be relevant to your job of interest.

Common optional resume sections include:

Volunteer work
Awards and honors
Hobbies and interests
Special projects
Certifications and licenses
Publications
Languages
Professional affiliations
Workshops
Presentations
Let's take a closer look at a couple of these optional sections.

Volunteer work
Volunteer work is a great way to distinguish yourself from other candidates. Not only does it show you care about a particular cause or community, but it also demonstrates a commitment to giving back and a willingness to go above and beyond. Plus, it gives you a chance to highlight valuable skills like collaboration, leadership, and problem-solving.

How to list volunteer work on a resume:

Full-time, consistent volunteer work belongs in your work experience and should be treated as if it were a job.
Otherwise, create a dedicated section called "Volunteer Experience" or "Community Service."
Include the organization, location, title (likely "[type of] volunteer," or "volunteer [job title]" i.e., "Shelter Volunteer" or "Volunteer Campaign Manager"), the dates you served, and one or two bullet points describing your contributions.
Publications
Including publications on your resume can help you show your expertise and how you've contributed to your field. A list of publications supports your ability to conduct research, articulate your ideas, and share knowledge with a wider audience.

How to list publications on a resume:

Create a distinct section titled "Publications."
Place it below your "Education" section.
Use reverse-chronological order, beginning with your most recent publication.
Include the year and title of each one.
Only mention publications relevant to the job.
Quick note: It's much more common to see publications listed on a CV. If you're writing a CV, visit our library of CV examples and choose a CV template that appeals to you.

Certifications
Certifications show that you have specialized skills and knowledge, often validating your qualifications for specific roles. Including them on your resume can make you stand out, especially in technical or highly regulated fields. In some cases, you might even want to feature your most relevant certifications in your resume header.

Here's a visual example of what your certifications section might look like